
  T H E  .dBBBBP dBBBBBP dBBBb     dBBBBb
        dBP                 BB        dBP
        `BBBb.   dBP    dBB BB   dBBBBK
           dBP  d8P    dBP' BB  dBP  BB
   .dBBBBBBP'  dBP    dBBBBBBB dBP  dB' dBBBBBP dBBBBb   dBBBBP dBP.dBP'
                                                   dBP
                                        dBP   dBBBBK   dBBBBP dBBBb
                                       dBP   dBP  BB  dBP    dBP  BB
                                      dBP   dBP  dB' dBBBBP dBP   `BB. (R)

                                                F T P    A R C H I V E

    Administered by: D. Joseph Creighton <Joe_Creighton@UManitoba.CA>
                   ftp.cc.umanitoba.ca  in  /startrek/

  This site offers various lists and FAQs (Frequently Asked Questions)
concerning the Star Trek universe and the ideas behind it.  Although we're
not a large site, we still hope to compile a decent archive for the technical
and factual details behind the television episodes and feature films.  If
you feel that there is some list or FAQ which will fit in well with those
we already offer, please contact the site administrator with your suggestion.

  All of the files here have their own authors and/or maintainers and
as such, we request that if you have any questions or problems with the
files themselves, please contact the author(s) and/or maintainer(s) directly.
Each of the files should contain a note about whom to contact.

  These people like to keep their files as accurate as possible and your
assistance can make things that much better for everyone else who enjoys
them.  As well, nothing makes an author feel better then when a simple
comment is sent their way.  Please feel free to drop them a line with your
praise, concerns, or thoughts.  They will greatly appreciate it, I'm sure.

  Copyright notice as it applies to most of the files herein:

  All of the files within the present working directory are free to be copied
for personal use, or for redistribution in their electronic formats, provided
that:
	(1)  each remains wholly unedited and unmodified, and
	(2)  no fee or compensation is charged for copies of or access to 
             any of these files (save for any download/connect time charges
	     from a commercial online service).

  Contact the author(s) of a list for specific permissions of use should your
requirements fall outside of these guidelines, or if you have any questions
about them.

  Enjoy.

